# Challenge 18 - Cycling Trips in New York City

This research examines the cycling trips in New York City (NYC) using the Citi Bike historical data during the period from 2013 to 2024, using Tableau. Due to the volume of data Tableau allows to import in and the speed limitation of processing big data, this study selected certain months (Mar for winter and July for summer) from the starting years (2013 and 2014) and the most recent years (2023 and 2024). The original names for all the variables in the datasets were not changed to reflect the naming systems and the changes recently; the datasets using the same naming system were concatenated into one file, resulting in two datasets in csv format, one for the earliest years 2013 and 2014 and another for the latest years 2023 and 2024.  

The two csv files, citiBikeTripsEarliest and citiBikeTripsLatest are used for the visualisions using Tableau; in addition, the geojson file for the Borough Boundaries in New York City is downloaded from NYC OpenData website and imported into Tableau as well to generate the city's official map. 

Total 9 visualisations are generated as below, together with the key findings from each visualisation:
 1. Four visualisations are generated using the cititrips data in July 2013 and March 2014. March is selected for winter month for two reasons: (1) March is one the the coldest month in NYC; (2) the most recent data available in the CitiBikeData website is March 2024. July 2013 is selected because (1) the data for March 2013 is not available yet; (2) July is one of the warmest month of the year, also giving sufficient space to March as a comparison between colder months and warmer months. 

    The visualisations (the bar charts and maps) from the earlist data show that: (1) at the beginning, the cyclying trips clustered around the lower Manhattan, the most lively borough in NYC, and primarily by subscribers/members and around Broadway region. (2)There are more cycling trips, apparently, in warmer month (July) than in colder month (March). 

2. Four visualisations for most recent years March, July 2023 and March 2024 are also generated, corresponding to the visualisations using the data in 2013 and 2014. There appears to be more casual riders, almost equal numbers around central park region. The number of trips increased significantly and the areas covered also extended to other boroughs and New Jersey (more clearly shown in the crowded maps). 

3. One bar chart is also generated for the year when COVID was at the peak (2020), using the variable "age" which is not collected by 2023. The glimpse shows that (1) during the COVID period when hygiene is more of a concern, the cycling trips was also impacted (2) "age" may not be a factor that affects cycling given the birth years cover from 1939 to 2004. This could also be the reason for the other variables such as gender and tripduration no longer being collected. The variable "bikeid" may not be much of use either given the ride_id replaced bikeid. 

4. From the 8 visualisations for the earliest years and the most recent years, two dashboards were generated and thereon one storyboard. 

The key finding from this challenge perhaps is that (1) more bikes as well as resting areas may be needed at the certain stops such as the central park area (2) more bike track/signs may be helpful for the casual riders to recognise the places or follow the routes better if there is intention to encourage casual riders to ride bikes.

##  References/acknowledgements

- University of Adelaide. (2023). Module 18 contents in particular.
https://bootcampspot.instructure.com/courses/4781/pages/18-tableau?module_item_id=1163387
- Climate and weather average in New York City. Retrieved from (https://www.timeanddate.com/weather/usa/new-york/climate)
- The help from the teaching team, Xpert Learning Assistant, and ChatGPT also acknowledged. 

**Data**
- Data for this dataset was generated by edX Boot Camps LLC, and is intended for educational purposes only.
- Citi Bike Trip Histories, retrieved from citibikenyc (https://citibikenyc.com/system-data)
- Borough Boundaries, retrieved from NYC OpenData (https://data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/Borough-Boundaries/tqmj-j8zm)